CLDR-17113 kbd: element/attr renaming (#3313)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35-keyboards.md

>
> In a list of keys specified by `longPressKeyIds`, the key matching `longPressDefaultKeyId` attribute (if present) specifies the default long-press target, which could be different than the first element. It is an error if the `longPressDefaultKeyId` key is not in the `longPressKeyIds` list.
>

> > Gestures are not nested: other gestures (such as flick, multiTap, longPress) are ignored on the keys in the `longPressKeyIds` list.

Reviewer: Like before, do not use "are" and similar factual statements. It is unclear who they target and what they mean. Say "Implementations may ignore/not support" or shall not or whatever is appropriate.

Author: Well put. I will revise.

Author: updated

**Syntax**

```xml

> <flickSegment directions="{list of directions}" "{the output}" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<flickSegment directions="{list of directions}" output="{the output}" />
```

>
> </small>

One of the `output` or `id` attributes is required.

_Attribute:_ `output` (optional)

> Specifies the character or character sequence from the `keys/key` element that is to have a special display.
> This attribute may be escaped with `\u` notation, see [Escaping](#Escaping).
> The `output` attribute may also contain the `\m{…}` syntax to reference a marker. See [Markers](#markers). Implementations may highlight a displayed marker, such as with a lighter text color, or a yellow highlight.

_Attribute:_ `id` (optional)

> > Specifies the `key` id. This is useful for keys which do not produce any output (no `output=` value), such as a shift key.

Reviewer: Since we currently don't use any frame keys, perhaps we shouldn't use them as examples.

```suggestion
> Specifies the `key` id. This is useful for keys which do not produce any output (no `output=` value), such as layer switching keys.
```

```xml
<keyboard3>
    <keys>
        <key id="a" output="a" longpress="\u{0301} \u{0300}" />

>         <key id="shift" layerId="shift" />

Reviewer 2: Note: a limitation of longpress is we can't do e.g. `longpress="ctrl"` to get to the ctrl layer

Reviewer: One way to solve this _if needed_ would be to make the `longpress` refer to key ids

Reviewer 2: That would certainly be elegant structurally, but it would then require another lot of key elements to do the mapping to outputs, and _those_ keys would not be able to have longpress themselves, etc. Would require a significant reshuffle of the current design.

Reviewer: They could. Longpress keys could be switching layers, and - if the options are presented in the UI - have multi tap, flicks or more longpress keys (nobody says the UI must dismiss as soon as you touch it) or assigned a `display` element. Implementations can simply not support it. I am not sure you need _that_ much structural redesign, but also I am not sure how useful this would be and the cost of that is more verbosity in the xml, hence emphasis on "if needed".

Compare this with multi tap situation. In this case, if you wanted to allow layer switching keys or long press keys, then you need significant implementation redesign as things change under your hands, and allowing "nested" multi tap does not make sense in the first place.

Reviewer 2: My feeling on this is: layering gestures on gestures would lead to significant implementation complexity, a big decrease in usability and discoverability, and very little additional benefit.

As far as I can tell, only the `layerId` attribute is important as an attribute for any gesture outputs. But if we did refactor in this way, then it would be nice to also specify the `longPressDefault` as an attribute of the longPress rather than the pattern we have right now `<longPress default='true'>`.

@DavidLRowe noted that there are extant examples of keyboards in the Keyman keyboards repository that have layerId-type actions assigned to longpress. My quick and somewhat rough search located at least 81 keyboards. There are two kinds of uses:

1. Keyboards that have a modifier key with additional layer switch keys in the longpress, e.g. [koreguaje](https://github.com/keymanapp/keyboards/blob/59c44e8384b736f5f8e51a0af39f91bc677f0cce/experimental/k/koreguaje/source/koreguaje.keyman-touch-layout#L248-L269). As far as I have checked, these are mostly translations from desktop layouts.

2. Keyboards that emit an output and then swap to another layer. This pattern is widely used, e.g. in [naijatype](https://github.com/keymanapp/keyboards/blob/1729d48b84c535d0f783667ee76c0dc9c50259a5/experimental/n/naijatype/source/naijatype.keyman-touch-layout#L10-L78). This is an important usability pattern -- and restricting that ability to base keys seems like a poor outcome.

Given the current restriction we have with CLDR's XML structure, supporting this would lead to significantly more verbose files.

Is it too late to be shuffling these deck chairs?

Author: maybe for consistency, the flick output should _also_ be a key.

That would allow `<display>` to affect flick output. 

> Is it too late to be shuffling these deck chairs?

I think the too-late ship has already sailed in a sense, that we're already renaming elements.

I'll update.
